With the rise of mass media throughout the 20th century, the popular image of women in America has undergone a substantial change. From Marilyn Monroe to Kate Moss, the body shapes of the most admired models have remained consistently slimmer than that of the average American woman, representing a nearly impossible ideal.


This has resulted in a severe rise in weight anxieties and negative body image among women and girls. Dissatisfaction with weight is nearly universal among women, while dieting is pervasive. Girls as young as 6 are commonly unhappy with their weight. This trend has likewise been reflected around the world wherever this media culture has become dominant. The result has been the massive spread of previously rare eating disorders and lifelong unhappiness toward one's own body.
1900s-1910s: The Gibson Girl


The Gibson Girl, a creation of illustrator Charles Dana Gibson, was a synthesis of prevailing beauty ideals at the turn of the century. Rarely is a beauty standard so explicit and clearly defined, yet Gibson based the iconic illustrations on “thousands of American girls.”
This ideal of femininity was depicted as slender and tall, albeit with a “voluptuous” bust and wide hips. The incongruous and exaggerated look was achieved by way of corseting, pinching the torso and waist significantly. Gibson Girls were portrayed as up-to-date on fashion and style, as well as physically active and in good health.


While the ideal originally began as the invention of an illustrator, the look was soon brought to life by various models and actresses such as Camille Clifford – winner of a contest to find a real-life analogue of Gibson's drawings – and Evelyn Nesbit. Following World War I, this idealized image gave way to that of the less prim and more informal flapper girl.
1920s: The Flapper
A product of the increasingly liberal “Roaring Twenties,” the flapper represented an idea of women that was far more casual than the formal, corseted Gibson Girls. The archetypal flapper was an immature young woman – a teenager or young adult – who was scantily-clad and had little regard for uptight behavioral norms.


They were often described as independent, wise-cracking and reckless. Their easygoing style represented a rejection of the Victorian style and also came to emblematize widespread disagreement with the Prohibition movement. Their appearance was one of boyishness and androgynous youth, with minimal breasts, a straight figure without any corseting, and shorter hair.
Flashing of the ankles, knees and legs was a common feature of flappers – dresses and skirts in the style were designed to be loose and reveal the legs when women would dance to jazz, popular among flappers. Bare arms were likewise nearly universal. Larger busts were frowned upon, and bras were made to tighten so as to flatten the chest. Blush, dark eye makeup, and substantial lips were in style, as well as tanning; a sporty and healthy appearance was prized.
The ideal of thinness and an enhanced appearance often drove women of the 1920s to diet and exercise in order to achieve this look, as well as buying cosmetics. The look to aspire to was increasingly depicted in advertisements. This freewheeling lifestyle came to an end with the onset of the Great Depression.
1930s-1940s: Fashion in Wartime
The impact of the Great Depression brought a more traditional style back to women's fashion and body image. Though short hair remained commonplace, skirts once again became longer, and clothing that showed off a natural waist was in style.


Shoulder width was particularly emphasized, and the prevailing shape at the time became starker, highlighting the specific contours of the body rather than draping and disguising them in softness.
With America's involvement in World War II came wartime requisitioning of fashion materials such as silk, nylon, and clothing dye. Women's attire therefore trended toward practicality, with simple blouses and un-elaborate jackets becoming predominant. Women even received instructions on how to tailor the unused suits of men away in combat, remaking them into everyday women's wear. And in contrast to the lean boyish flapper style, women now aspired to become more curvaceous and emphasize their feminine figure. In particular, advertisements now told women how they could avoid a too-skinny look.
In this era, the celebrity image was almost within reach of the average woman. While American women had an average BMI of 23.6, many celebs ranged from 18.5 (Barbara Stanwyck) to to 20.3 (Lena Horne) – a gap, to be sure, but not an extraordinary one.
1950s: Post-War
The ideal body image for women remained fuller-figured in the post-war period of the 1950s. A busty, voluptuous hourglass look was prized, as exhibited by models such as Marilyn Monroe and Grace Kelly.


The increasing popularity of Hollywood films helped propel glamour models like Monroe to widespread public consciousness, and combined with the increased freedom of material after the end of wartime rationing, women's fashion options were once again extensive. However, this expansion in options now meant that women were expected to take full advantage of beauty products and never leave the home without looking their best. Along with a well-composed overall appearance, flawless skin was now expected as well.
During this period, the average woman’s BMI remained steady at 23.6, still well above that of Shirley MacLaine (18.8) or Elizabeth Taylor (20.5).
1960s: Twiggy
With the sexual revolution of the 1960s came a substantial reversal of the '50s idealized image. Rather than curvaceous figures, thin and androgynous women were now prominent, somewhat recapitulating the flapper look of the 1920s.


Twiggy, a major supermodel of the 1960s, embodied many of these seismic shifts in idealized body types. In contrast to the full-figured and voluptuous Monroe and Kelly, the 112 lb Twiggy had a minimal chest, a slight frame, short hair, and a boyish look. This new form of beauty abandoned all curves and any hint of a mature look, instead appearing almost prepubescent.
However, a “hippie” look including long, straight hair also came to the fore in the latter half of the '60s, and a more full-figured hourglass look persisted among several high-profile actresses such as Jane Fonda and Sophia Loren.
This decade, the average American woman’s BMI rose to 25.2 – taking her quite a distance from celebrities like Soledad Miranda (17.6) and Jessica Lange (20.4).
1970s: Thin Is In
The 1970s saw the continued dominance of a Twiggy-like thin ideal, which began to have a widespread impact on women's health and eating habits. Anorexia nervosa first began to receive mainstream coverage in the '70s, and singer Karen Carpenter was known to diet at starvation levels over the decade – a practice which would claim her life in 1983. The era also saw the rise of diet pills, which often used potentially dangerous amphetamines to suppress the appetite.


Actress Farrah Fawcett and her layered hair and one-piece swimsuits also rose to prominence as a sex symbol of the time. Hair was typically worn long, and makeup was now minimal to achieve a “natural look.” The cosmetics industry diversified to take advantage of these trends, with a wider range of offerings in terms of makeup looks.
American women’s BMI remained relatively steady at 24.9, making it difficult to match the body types of celebrities like Morgan Fairchild (18) or Joni Mitchell (20.5).
1980s: Supermodels and Hardbodies


While the 1970s thin ideal persisted, there was now also an increased emphasis on fitness. Toned but not overly muscular bodies were now prized, and aerobic exercise shows and videotapes became a widespread trend – dieting was no longer the only way that women were expected to keep a perfect figure.


Media depictions of women in the '80s tended toward even more slenderness and greater height. The most popular fashions included headbands, tights, leggings, leg warmers, and short skirts made of spandex or other stretchy materials. This era also saw the rise of supermodels such as Naomi Campbell, Cindy Crawford, and Claudia Schiffer. In the '80s, 60% of Playboy magazine models weighed 15% less than a healthy average weight for their size.
For the average American woman, such a body shape proved difficult or impossible to achieve. While women had an average BMI of 25 in 1980, most female celebrities ranged from 17.6 (Cheryl Tiegs) to 20.4 (Bo Derek).
1990s: Heroin Chic and Baywatch
Throughout the '90s, this ideal became even more exaggerated. Women were expected to maintain an increasingly thin look, yet with large breasts as well, as popularly depicted by Pamela Anderson on “Baywatch.”
Meanwhile, high fashion also began to emphasize the “waif look” and “heroin chic.” This movement stood opposed to the fit and healthy look of '80s supermodels, instead focusing on thinness alone and a bony appearance. The look was epitomized by Calvin Klein advertisements featuring models such as Kate Moss.


Throughout the decade, American women continued to face an impossible standard. Celebrities like Tara Reid (17.5) and Penelope Cruz (19.6) showed off bodies that were far below the average of 26.3. By the year 2000, the situation was more dire than ever: Women with an average BMI of 27.5 were left to compare their bodies to Keira Knightley (17.2) and Natalie Portman (19.5).
The Shrinking Woman: Bodies in Media


The weight and proportion of popular female icons, as measured by BMI, has remained consistently below that of the average American woman for several decades. In the 1950s, Marilyn Monroe had a BMI of 20; Twiggy, the '60s supermodel, had a BMI of merely 15. '80s model Cindy Crawford had a BMI of 19, while Kate Moss's BMI was only 16.
For comparison, the average American woman had a BMI of 25.2 in the '60s, 24.9 in the '70s, 25 in the '80s, and 26.3 in the '90s. As the size of the average woman continued to increase, growing to 27.5 in the 2000s, models and actresses maintained what is by comparison a super-thin look.
Who Defines “Plus Size”? Bodies in Business
Twenty years ago, models weighed, on average, 8% less than average American women. By now, they weigh 23% less. Most models now have a weight that’s considered clinically anorexic.
Even the definition of “plus size” has begun to shrink. Ten years ago, plus size models typically ranged between size 12 and 18, while they now span only sizes 6 through 14. Half of American women actually wear a size 14 or larger, meaning that even plus sizes no longer represent the average American woman. Most designer fashions now only range up to size 10 or 12.


Overall Trends
The American body ideal for women has fluctuated somewhat throughout the 20th century, with alternately stick-thin or voluptuous, busty figures being valued at times. But in recent decades, these two conflicting images appear to have merged into a modern synthesis of what is considered beautiful: an almost unhealthily thin and bony frame, combined with a substantial bust.


Meanwhile, the gap between the size and shape of models and that of the average American woman has only continued to widen. As the average BMI of women has increased, models have remained significantly below this average, often with BMIs of a mere 15 or 16 – considered clinically underweight. The BMIs of celebrity women are only slightly better, most commonly ranging from 17 to 20. The result is that, for a growing number of American women, the image of beauty portrayed in media is simply impossible for them to achieve and potentially unhealthy even if they did achieve it.
As evidenced by the fluctuations of popular images of women in America throughout the 20th century, beauty ideals are not a permanent and unchanging set of expectations. They are relative to their culture and era, and they shift over time. Just as these body images have changed in America, the ideal of beauty for women can be similar or sometimes much different in other parts of the world.
Western Nations


English-speaking, European, and first-world Western nations often broadly share in the same conflicting messages of beauty found in America. Britain has a similar struggle with popular messages promoting unattainable thinness, leading to weight issues and widespread dieting among women – 1 in 4 are on a diet, and over 50% of girls say that girls their age struggle with body image. In Australia, eating disorders affect a million people and cost the economy $70 billion a year.


In France, long the global capital of the fashion industry, lawmakers have passed legislation barring advertisements promoting “extreme” thinness or dieting, following the anorexia-linked deaths of several models. In Italy, women are extensively objectified in media, and many young women are driven to obtain plastic surgery as soon as they reach the legal age to do so. And in Sweden, an increasing number of upper-class young women are obsessed with their appearance and dissatisfied with their bodies – this group has the highest incidence of anorexia nervosa.
In Spain and Mexico, 1 in 4 teen girls are at risk of developing an eating disorder, and they face pressure from those around them to lose weight. Brazilians are known to overestimate the actual size of their bodies, while desiring to be thinner. A substantial portion of the Brazilian population takes appetite suppressants, and numerous models have died of anorexia.
Eastern and Third-World Nations
Eating disorders such as anorexia and bulimia were almost wholly absent in Japan and China in the early '90s. However, Chinese women do exhibit a significant fear of weight gain. Japanese women, too, are becoming far skinner in recent years and are very critical of each other's appearance. Twenty-nine percent of Japanese women are now underweight.


Elsewhere, Nigeria now has businesses dedicated to helping people put on weight, offering a place where they can do nothing but eat and sleep. In Mauritania, young girls are encouraged to eat to gain weight in order to be more attractive to potential partners. And in the island nation of Tonga, 90% of the population is overweight, which is considered a status symbol. In Cape Town, South Africa, two-thirds of teen girls perceive excess weight as a sign of happiness and wealth.
In Karachi, Pakistan, high media exposure has been found to be linked to female body dissatisfaction. Saudi Arabian women both overestimate and underestimate their weight at about the same rates. In India, internalization of media by young women and girls is linked to an increased drive to be thin. Potentially dangerous skin-lightening creams have also become a popular way for Indians to approach a whiter body image.
A number of factors contribute to women's poor self-image and body dissatisfaction. In a longitudinal study of teenagers, the strongest predictors of negative body image were found to be a lack of parental support, negative mood and feelings, and the choice to diet, as well as a lack of support from peers. Girls show higher rates of negative body image than boys, and unlike boys, the intensity of this increases as they age.


Another study showed that after women were shown media images depicting the modern thin ideal, they had an increase in anxiety, depression, anger, and dissatisfaction with their bodies. Use of such media has also been found to be associated with symptoms of disordered eating and an urge to be thin. As women's family, friends, and peers also absorb these media messages, this adds to an increased pressure to aspire to this ideal coming from all directions.


Moreover, as women pursue this thin ideal, they are more likely to become more dissatisfied with their appearance. Most will not be able to attain this ideal and will remain unhappy with their bodies. Perfectionist women, anxious or depressed women, and women with poor self-esteem are especially at risk for developing an eating disorder. At this point, anxiety over body image and ongoing dieting have become frequent enough to be considered a normal if unhealthy state of affairs among women.


In contrast, positive relationships and acceptance from friends are associated with a healthy self-image. As the belief in thinness being important to relationships with friends decreased, positive self-image increased. Thus, when this thin ideal is deemphasized in one's peer group, a positive self-image can more easily be cultivated.
Aspirations for thinness can begin to impact girls at a surprisingly young age. In one study, 40% of 6-year-old girls expressed a desire to be thinner. An overwhelming majority of 10-year-old girls – 81% – fear being fat. Half of girls in 5th grade through 12th grade feel that magazine images have made them want to lose weight.
Among girls who are of normal weight, 50-70% perceive themselves as being overweight. These self-perceptions can directly affect their eating behaviors and health. Of girls age 6 to 12, 35% have been on a diet at some point. Ten- and 11-year-old girls who had dieted were shown to have internalized media messages to a greater extent than those who did not diet.


Globally, rates of eating disorders in young girls such as anorexia and bulimia are steadily increasing. This has occurred in England, Brazil, Australia, Singapore, and a number of other nations. Fiji is an ideal setting to study the impact of media. Television was not introduced in the remote provinces of Fiji until the mid-1990s. Over the next three years, teenage girls went from viewing being overweight positively to viewing it negatively, and 74% thought of themselves as too fat. Many decided to diet.


In response to widespread negative self-image and unhealthy eating habits among women and girls, a number of business, media, and government entities have launched campaigns to promote positive self-perceptions of weight and appearance. A Brazilian modeling agency advised women to “say no to anorexia,” with billboards showing altered images of emaciated figures to reflect what a woman would look like if she attained an idealized shape and weight.


French model Isabelle Caro appeared in Italian ads showing her emaciated body and the consequences of anorexia. The Looking Glass Foundation has also run a series of ads to teach people about the subtle warning signs that someone may be suffering from an eating disorder. And in 2007, the Council of Fashion Designers of America launched a health initiative aimed at helping at-risk models receive assistance and treatment.
Beauty and cosmetic company Dove embarked on their Campaign for Real Beauty in 2004, with a series of viral advertisements portraying the differences between women as depicted in ads and women's actual appearance without any makeup or digital enhancement. Their print ads have also shown women of various weights, shapes and sizes, without alteration.
New York City has promoted positive body image in girls aged 7-12 with a series of PSAs depicting everyday girls, captioned “I'm Beautiful The Way I Am.” And National Eating Disorder Awareness Week, orchestrated by the National Eating Disorder Association, has been successful in urging more people to seek help for their eating disorders.


By the end of the 20th century, female beauty standards in America have remained unrealistic and extreme, with popular images of thinness being more out-of-reach for the average woman than ever before. This trend has been reflected in many first-world nations, although women in certain developing nations lack this widespread anxiety over their weight.


The chief contributors to negative self-image and weight dissatisfaction are media images promoting thinness, peer pressure, and personal levels of anxiety or depression – conditions which can be exacerbated by continued unsuccessful pursuit of an unattainable goal. The result has been a marked rise in weight anxieties in even very young girls, as well as an increase in dieting from a young age, and even potentially deadly eating disorders such as anorexia. While the severity of this problem is receiving increasing attention in the public sphere, these anxieties remain so common as to be “normal” among women.
Perceptions surrounding beauty and body types not only vary by culture, but have evolved significantly throughout history.


In a visually dynamic attempt to recreate this evolution, BuzzFeed Video showcased a diverse cast of models to depict more than 3,000 years of women’s ideal body types by each society’s standard of beauty.


Slender
Narrow Shoulders
High Waist
Symmetrical Face
In Ancient Egypt, women were encouraged in their independence and beauty. Ancient Egyptian society promoted a sex-positive environment where premarital sex was entirely acceptable and women could divorce their husbands without shame.


Plump
Full-bodied
Light Skin
Ancient Greece worshiped the male form, going so far as to proclaim that women’s bodies were ‘disfigured’ versions of men’s. In this time period, men faced a much higher standard of beauty and perfection than women.


Slim Waist
Pale Skin
Large Eyes
Small Feet
Small feet is one aspect of Chinese beauty that has continued for hundreds of years. During the Han Dynasty, Chinese culture favored slim women with long black hair, white teeth and red lips. Historically, the Chinese people have favored women with ultra-femininity.


Ample Bosom
Rounded Stomach
Full Hips
Fair Skin
During the Italian Renaissance, it was the wife’s duty to reflect her husband’s status, both in behavior and outward appearance. A full body, light hair and light skin all were thought of as the superior indications of beauty.


Desirably Plump
Full-figured
Cinched-waist
Ahh, the era of the corset. In this time period, women cinched their waists with tight-fitting undergarments to give the perception of the desirable hourglass figure. This time period lasted through the reign of Queen Victoria, considered by many as one of the most influential figures of the time.


Flat Chest
Downplayed Waist
Short Bob Hairstyle
Boyish Figure
Beauty in the 1920s featured an androgynous look for women. They wore bras that flattened their chest and wore clothing that gave them a curve-less look. Women even shortened their hair, leaving behind the long-held belief that long hair signified beauty and desirability.


Curves
Hourglass Figure
Large Breasts
Slim Waist
The boyish figure trend didn’t last for long. Fast-forward a decade and the hourglass figure is back. The classic example of this ideal woman’s body is Marilyn Monroe, the Golden Girl of Hollywood.


Willowy
Thin
Long, slim Legs
Adolescent Physique
Peace, love and thin seemed to be the motto of ideal beauty for women in the 1960s. “Swinging London,” a term used to describe the flourishing fashion and cultural scene of London in the 1960s, influenced women’s dress and style in America during the same period.


Athletic
Svelte, but Curvy
Tall
Toned Arms
This time period brought about an exercise-crazed phenomenon. Workout videos were all the rage, encouraging women to be thin, but also fit. This era also saw an upswing in anorexia, thought by some experts to be caused by an widespread obsession with exercise.




Waifish
Extremely Thin
Translucent Skin
Androgynous
Homeless chic, anyone? The celebrated body of this time period was a woman who looked thin, frail and neglected. Model Kate Moss was the heroine of this heroin decade–pale, withdrawn and thin.




Flat Stomach
‘Healthy’ Skinny
Large Breasts + Butt
Thigh Gap
Kim Kardashian, as unfortunate as it may be, is the poster woman of ideal beauty standards for the modern woman. Women are expected to be skinny, but not too skinny, with large breasts and a big butt, all while maintaining a flat stomach. Women increasingly are seeking plastic surgery ‘fixes’ to achieve this look.


WHERE IS THE FACE THAT would launch a thousand ships today?
"Bette Midler," says John Kobal, author and founder of the Kobal Collection of the History of Cinema. "Classic beauty? Of course not. But it's her vitality, her personality that makes her funny and that makes her desirable and beautiful."
"Linda Evans and Kathleen Turner," says Tony Shepherd, director of talent for Aaron Spelling productions. "Their beauty comes from within."
"Unique individuals like Rita Hayworth and Debra Winger," adds Kobal.
"Frederika," says Francesco Scavullo, fashion photographer, referring to the highly paid model.
"We all seem to know the look of a classically beautiful face," says Scavullo.
Or do we?
The ancient Greeks believed perfect proportions were the key to a woman's beautiful face. They would not have prized the quirky beauty of a modern movie star such as Meryl Streep or Sissy Spacek. The double chins on the women of Rubens would offend the lenses of present-day fashion photographers. And Victorians, who thought tiny rosebud lips were beauty's quintessential element, would be aghast at the full, sensuous mouths admired today.
History shows that standards of beauty are constantly changing. Most everyone agrees that certain women -- Greta Garbo, Grace Kelly, Ingrid Bergman -- are truly beautiful. But what actually constitutes beauty in any given era is very complex.
"Faces go in and out of fashion," says Diana Vreeland, special consultant to the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
Yet it is the link between fashion and politics that seems to determine beauty standards.
As Bruce F. Norton, political science professor at American University, says: "What is considered a beautiful face is often influenced by what is going on in society."
The post-war optimism of the 1950s, for example, produced Doris Day and Debbie Reynolds. "Sweet enough to be edible," quips Kobal. And then in the 1960s there was more concern with social protest and idealism than with feminine decorations. This, says Norton, created an atmosphere that could easily foster the androgynous face of Twiggy.
Today a segment of youth disenchanted with society is distinguished by the whitened faces, pastel hair and blackened eyes reminiscent of the German cabarets of the 1930s.
But the punk look is clearly a minority standard. For most people, a key feature of beauty today is the good-health look.
"What all beautiful women today have in common is an obvious look of health," says Andrea Robinson, beauty editor of Vogue. "Even a model's skin tone implies she leads a healthy life. This is the look today's women try to achieve."
As Scavullo explains of the models he photographs: "Their facial contours are perfect, they have big, intelligent eyes, and a mane of hair. They are healthy. Full of energy."
The "healthy-is-beautiful" trend started some two decades ago, when the pale lips and heavily made-up eyes -- the rebellious, Left Bank of Paris look of the 1960s -- gave way to a natural, healthy image enhanced by good food, workout gyms and Jane Fonda. A Europeon Vogue cover in the early 1970s featured a model whose tanned face was still wet from a swim. Farrah Fawcett personified the glowing smile of the '70s. And then came Jane Fonda and the fitness look.
Another important trend today is age. Over the past decade, older models, such as Trish Hooker, appear with increasing frequency in popular magazines. "We have even had three playmates over the age of 30," says Playboy's director of photography, Gary Cole, "and we've recently featured a beautiful woman over 50 who was still photogenic."
Even gray hair is coming out of the closet. "Gray hair is acceptable and always has been," says Vogue's Andrea Robinson. "The gray may need enhancing so that it complements the woman's natural skin tone, but it doesn't need to be dyed another color." In general, Robinson says, "there is less stigma attached to middle age these days which affects our ideas of beauty."
"Beauty," concludes Tony Shepherd, "is no longer limited to 19-year-olds."
This trend is not surprising in view of the fact that the baby boom generation is now hitting 40 and the fastest growing segment of the population is the elderly.
At the same time, a major part of beauty is sex appeal. High fashion photographer Scavullo states it bluntly: "Today's beautiful faces are sexy. Like an animal's." And, of course sex appeal is a principal concern of Playboy, which Cole calls a "reflector rather than a setter of trends."
"When choosing our centerfolds, we look first for a beautiful face," he explains. "We think readers want to see a face that looks soft and flirtatious. The women in our magazine can't have a look that is aggressive or unfriendly."
Yet a countertrend with some models is the aloof look, a "don't mess with me look" -- stark and strong.
All this reflects the explosion of opportunities for women and the many conflicting roles women now play. The current trend toward striking and distinctive faces in models pays homage to the individuality of today's woman. There are many different types of beautiful faces today and a greater tolerance of diversity.
"Don't assume that standards of beauty are accidental," says Gloria Steinem, the cofounding editor of Ms. magazine. "They reflect the power structure in our society. That's why today ethnic looks and older women are more acceptable."
No more Debbie Reynolds. Today it's Bette Midler, the model Iman, Meryl Streep, Barbra Streisand, Lena Horn, Katharine Hepburn, Bianca Jagger.
"So many different looks are considered beautiful today," says Karen nderegg, editor-in-chief of Elle. "Women don't feel the need to conform and are comfortable with their individuality."
But the quest for beauty is not easy. The search has helped establish a growing "how-to" beauty book publishing business with 202 books on the market today that are devoted to personal beauty. Another 1,277 beauty books are in the Library of Congress. There are at least 100 magazines on news stands that cover cosmetics, fashion and the country's beauty culture. Aphrodite and Apollo
It all began 2,400 years ago in Greece and Rome, when the West's standards of beauty were set.
"But the Greeks knew that there was more to a person than just a face," says Dr. Dietrich von Bothmer, chairman of the Greek and Roman department at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. "Beauty was considered an excellence, like honesty or bravery. Physical beauty was important, but it had to be coupled with goodness of spirit as well."
In a very old ode Plato tells us the three wishes of every Greek: to See BEAUTY, Page 14
be healty, to be beautiful, and to become rich by honest means. Greek parents-to-be were so concerned about their offspring's beauty that they placed statues of Aphrodite or Apollo, the two dieties of physical appearance, in their bedrooms to help them conceive beautiful children.
"The secret to beauty, by Greek standards, was in the harmonious proportions of facial features," says American University art historian and painter Carol Ravenal "There was both a rational as well as mystical appeal. Mathematics was the key to form."
The Greeks had devised a science of physiognomy, according to John Scarborough, professor of classics and history of medicine at the University of Wisconsin. The science was so highly developed that the Greeks ' "even read a person's character from physical features."
Plato saw the structure of the human body and face as a system of triads. For Greek mathematicians, the number 3 had special significance. The perfect face was divided into three sections: from hairline to eyes, from eyes to upper lip, and from upper lip to chin. The ideal face was two thirds as wide as it was high.
Centuries later observers also looked for the elusive mathematical formula to define beauty. In the 18th century, art teacher Antoine Mengs scrutinized Greek statues and devised a complicated formula to duplicate a face beautiful by Greek standards. He determined the size of the eyes, the space between them, where the hairline should start on the brow, and the precise distance from the tip of the nose to the lips.
But when Johann Winckelmann, one of the first historians to examine ideals of beauty, looked for "perfect" beauty in Greek art, he concluded that it was difficult to find -- if, indeed, it existed at all. "If," he said, "it was absolutely clear what true beauty is, then men wouldn't differ so much in their opinions."
Certain characteristics, according to Winckelmann, were recognized by the Greeks as beautiful: a straight nose or one that fell in a slightly depressed line from its root to the forehead; a low forhead for the look of youth; and perfect eyebrows, called "eyebrows of grace," that formed a delicate arch just over the brow bone. Particularly appealing were eyebrows that grew together over the nose -- "a feature," says art historian von Bothmer, "which we certainly wouldn't think much of today."
The mouth admired by the Greeks was similar to the current fashion: naturally reddish, the lower lip slightly fuller than the upper. The perfect Greek chin, round and smooth, was unmarked by any dimple. These weren't considered appealing for centuries to come.
The most important criterion for beauty was the hair. Blond hair, the color of flax, was considered the loveliest, so it is not by coincidence that many Greek gods are portrayed as blond. Women's hair was worn simply, combed and parted above the brow, gathered at the back of the head and twisted with ribbons into a high top knot.
To achieve the desired look, Greek women used makeup, including powder, rouge made from a root imported from Syria, black and red pencils and perfume, all applied before a shiny metal disc that reflected their faces. And, to hide unwanted signs of aging, Greek women camaflouged their wrinkles with white lead and tinted their hair to cover gray.
The use of makeup, though, was limited to the hetaera, or courtesans, because beauty wasn't considered important for the Greek housewife. As the orator Demonthenes put it, a man married "to have a faithful watchdog in the house. Beauty and gratification of the senses came from the mistress."
But being beautiful did not always mean being nice. Phyrne, a young mistress of the fourth-century Athenian sculptor Praxitiles and model for some of his most beautiful works, had a particularly nasty way of showing off her advantages of youth. During a game of follow-the-leader with other courtesans at a feast, she called for a bowl of water and washed her face. The other women, bound by the rules of the game to follow suit, had to wash their faces, too. Phyrne, young and naturally beautiful, looked none the worse, but her older companions spent an uncomfortable evening with their faces bare of any makeup.
The Romans took up where the Greeks left off. In the first century, the Roman poet Ovid wrote the first manual of beauty advice. The science of makeup was well known in the ancient world. According to historian Scarborough, women of the upper classes followed Ovid's recommendations and prepared their cosmetics according to his formulas. Women tinted their hair if it became gray, smeared wrinkled skin with wax to make it look smoother, and replaced missing eyebrows with ones made of fur.
Renaissance and Rotting Teeth
Beautiful women of the Middle Ages -- from the 13th to 15th century -- were found in the legends of King Arthur and the poems of Chaucer. The standards of beauty were very specific. Hair should be blond and fine like gold wire, and if nature didn't provide the proper color, it could be produced by dyes imported from the East. "And," says Christian Zacher, professor of medieval literature at Ohio State University, "gray eyes were prized above everything else."
The concept of feminine beauty entered a new era with the the 15th-century Italian Renaissance. Botticelli, Leonardo and Raphael painted a procession of marvelously varied faces yet all are united by a certain serious beauty. "Boicelli's Madonnas are lovely," says art historian Ravenal, "because they appear delicate and destructable." Leonardo's paintings of the Virgin show a woman who is beautiful not because her features are perfect in the Greek sense but because her face conveys a sense of mystery combined with maternal tenderness.
Raphael's standard of beauty shaped the work of artists for centuries. "His image of beauty is exquisite," says Ravenal. "It's not threatening. While less monumental than the Greeks, it's still harmonic. Raphael understood the feminine psyche."
A spirit of the scientific inquiry permeated Renaissance activity. Artists like Leonardo and Albrecht Durer investigated facial proportions but, says Barbara Brown, curator of Southern Baroque art at the National Gallery, "they were looking for a guide to drawing rather than a canon of beauty." Others in this era, however, did try to come up with a formula. A 16th-century Italian writer, Firenznola, defined the ideal face down to the smallest detail, even identifying variations of color in the whorls of the ear.
In England, the elegant women of the 16th century had their own ideal of beauty, the never-married Queen Elizabeth I. They mimicked her hair (dyed), eyebrows (plucked) and facial beauty (aided by thick layers of cosmetics). Lotions, potions, ointments and creams were sold at fairs and brewed at home.
One popular cosmetic of the day was Venetian ceruse, a substance made of white lead which helped women achieve the ghostly white pallor so sought after by Elizabethans. Bathing became acceptable, and "Water to make women beautiful forever" was one sales pitch of the day. Unfortunately, many cosmetic potions of the day were not as innocent as water. One "brand name" lotion of the 16th century, "Solomon's Water," was made of sublimate of mercury and guaranteed to eliminate all spots, freckles and warts from the face. It did. But in the process it also removed most of the outer layer of skin.
In the Elizabethan era, women began to realize that rotting teeth were unattractive, so they concocted tooth powders of honey and sugar or crushed bones and fruit peel to smear on their bad teeth. If all else failed, they resorted to the familiar trick of the day -- keeping their mouths closed.
The 1600s were a time when the beauty publishing industry gained momentum with books such as Sir Huplats' "Delights for Ladies," a how-to for making cosmetics at home, cleaning teeth and coloring hair. One piece of advice from Huplats: If your hair fell out after dying it with sulfuric acid, wear a wig.
Rubens: Big is Beautiful
The women painted by Peter Paul Rubens in the 16th century would hardly be thought of as today's ideal. They were pale but with rosy flesh tones, and their cheeks and chins were resplendantly plump. So were his bodies, with rounded thighs and swelling busts. Rubens infused his subjects with the warmth he experienced in his personal life. His long first marriage was happy, ending only with his wife's death. Four years later, at the age of 53, he married 16-year-old Helene Fourment, whose face appeared many times in the paintings made during the rest of his life.
Class, in economic and political terms, became a factor in beauty. According to Jean Liebault, a 16th-century Parisian doctor, The faces of ideal women should be pale, because unattractively tanned skin was associated with country women who had to work outdoors. Cheeks should be soft and pink and dimpled like children's, and best of all was the asset of having a double chin. Red hair was out, eyes should be big, ears small, and teeth present.
But not everyone agreed. Liebault's wife had her own point of view on her husband's notion's of beauty, which she expressed in a book called "The Miseries of the Married Women."
By the end of the 17th century many women were still concocting herbal creams using traditional recipes or experimenting with their own rather unusal ingredients. Dung, minced veal and goat hair were mixed with lemon juice or milk. If an improved complexion didn't result after applying these remedies, women would hide their faces behind masks of black velvet or silk stiffened with leather.
And yet there was a price to pay for being beautiful. A famous woman of the time, the London socialite Maria Gunning, was said to have died from her makeup. After years of whitening her skin with Venetian ceruse, she was eventually poisened by her cosmetic's active ingredient: lead.
By the late 18th century, cries revolution was in the political winds of Europe and America. Individualism and personal liberty were the rallying cries of the day. In art, "faces became important," says Ellen G. Miles, curator of painting and sculpture at the National Portrait Gallery. "Features used to be less important. Now there was a real interest in the subject rather than the painting's historical or allegorical context."
Victorians and the Double Standard
One London author, Alexander Walker, considered definitions of beauty in his 1836 book "Beauty: An Analysis and Classification." He indentified the need for asymmetry, saying that it is "the first character of beauty in thinking beings. An occasional irregularity makes us better appreciate symmetry."
Victorian women had to live with the double message, to hold your man by being "seductive and innocent at the same time," says Valerie Steele, author of "Fashion and Eroticism: Ideals of Feminine Beauty from the Victorian Era to the Jazz Age" (Oxford University Press, 1985).
In a sense, the Victorians inherited all of the earlier western beliefs bout feminine beauty from the Greek myth of Aphrodite, which associates beauty with love or sexual desire, and from the negative myth of Pandora, in which beauty is equated with evil. On one hand, Victorians were anxious to enhance their beauty with cosmetics but were hesitant to do so because makeup was associated with prostitutes. In addition, they were aware by this time of the dangers lead and arsenic contained in some preparations.
As a result, there was much debate over does she or doesn't she wear makeup. Lois Banner, in "American Beauty" (University of Chicago Press, 1984), says that even friends and associates could not always tell whether a woman was using cosmeitcs. Mrs. William Seaton of Washington, wife of the editor of the National Intelligencer, wrote to a friend in 1816 that the "belles of Washington spoke of using rouge and pearl powder" with great familiarity. Yet, although Dolly Madison was supposed to use rouge, Mrs. Seaton absolutely did not believe the rumors because, she said, "as I am well assured I saw her color come and go at the Naval Ball."
To achieve a beautiful look, without benefit of externally applied cosmetics, some women drank vinegar or ate chalk or even arsenic -- hardly what today's doctor would recommend. But at that time, physicians would prescribe Fowler's solution, an arsenic-based medication, to help get rid of acne. Applied directly to the face, it produced a translucent skin tone and became so popular that women used it regularly as a face cream. The drawback was that arsenic eventually was absorbed by the body through the skin just like the white lead in ceruse had been centuries before.
A forerunner of today's punk look was the rebellious 19th-century artist Dante Gabriel Rosetti, who painted women a far cry from the Victorian ideal but whose looks gained some popularity. Rosetti, himself a rather promiscuous and poetic man, chose to paint neurotic, depraved women whose faces, surrounded by long, wild red hair, showed a pained, remote beauty. His favorite model, Elizabeth Siddal, was tortured by his infidelities, and this lonely creature, with a brooding full-lipped sensuous face, was found dead at a young age from an overdose of laudanum, a type of opium.
In pre-World War I times, full faces and voluptuous bodies were favored traits that were associated with good health and beauty. Actress Lillian Russell fit the bill perfectly. A star of the musical comedy stage in New York, Russell had blond hair, luminous white skin and soft dimpled cheeks, not unlike a doll's face. She was described as "a golden-haired goddess with big rounded cheeks." For several generations of American women, Russell was the epitome of feminine beauty. If a woman made a slighting remark about another, the retort would be, "You're no Lillian Russell yourself."
The other face that captured the public, especially in England, was that of actress Lilly Langtry, who modeled for artist James McNeil Whistler. "She had a pure Greek profile," Oscar Wilde said of Langtry. Yet despite her reputation as ngland's most beautiful woman, many Americans did ot find her attractive. She was a large woman with a muscular body, and even though she had an extremely fair complexion, her large nose and large lips were not considered particularly beautiful by the American public.
The Modern Face
World War I was, in many respects, the dividing line between the Victorian age and the modern era. Tastes in clothing fashion changed as did tastes in women's faces. The corset was put in the attic and the modern woman openly made up and had her hair bobbed. It was an era when the women won the right to vote and were even critized for leaving their faces in a "raw state" without benefit of cosmetics. Marlene Dietrich -- with plucked brows, etched red lips and rouge painted beneath the cheek-bone rather than on it -- typified the elegant face.
During the 1920s the charming childish "flapper" look -- characterized by a small, pursed mouth, round face, and obligatory short waved hairdo -- was replaced in the public's imagination by the face of Greta Garbo. "She changed everyone's way of thinking about what was attractive." says Kobal. "No longer was beauty amorphous." Strength now became an ingredient in the formula for a beautiful face.
From the 1950s, the face that became an icon of American beauty was that of Marilyn Monroe. Surrounding her soft, open, vulnerable face was a frame of peroxided hair. A color traditionally associated with angels and virtuous women, it heightened her raw sensuality and legitimized it as well. Women of all ages chose to bleach their hair, too, and obtain exact copies of her bright red lipstick made by companies such as Max Factor, creator of "makeup for the stars." According to Kobel, the cosmetics she used "were applied so cleverly to take away what wasn't quite right with her face."
"In her lifetime," said Steinem, who has recently published a new book on Monroe, "Marilyn" (Henry Holt, 1986), "she was not equally appealing to men and women. With its promise of sexual reward, admiring her face and body was a masculine pheonomenon. But now, after her death, the challenge is gone and women can feel more emphathetic towards her."
Just as the perception of Monroe has changed, so has the role of women and the concept of beauty. Perhaps the most telling example of how much the ideal beauty has evolved begins in the last century with Sir Francis Galton. He constructed a model of beauty by superimposing hundreds of pretty faces and decided that the composite was the ideal face of the time -- one with regular, average features. The ugly face, by contrast, was "full of surprises."
A face "full of surprises" not beautiful?
"Unfair, untrue, absurd|" says Kobal today. "Look at the faces of Gloria Swanson and Georgia O'Keefe. A nose or mouth of a different turn is often what's needed to capture our interest and our heart. It's the hybrid that we find truly captivating."
This chapter analyses the role of the mass media in people’s perceptions of beauty. We summarize the research literature on the mass media, both traditional media and online social media, and how they appear to interact with psychological factors to impact appearance concerns and body image disturbances. There is a strong support for the idea that traditional forms of media (e.g. magazines and music videos) affect perceptions of beauty and appearance concerns by leading women to internalize a very slender body type as ideal or beautiful. Rather than simply being passive recipients of unrealistic beauty ideals communicated to them via the media, a great number of individuals actually seek out idealized images in the media. Finally, we review what is known about the role of social media in impacting society’s perception of beauty and notions of idealized physical forms. Social media are more interactive than traditional media and the effects of self‐presentation strategies on perceptions of beauty have just begun to be studied. This is an emerging area of research that is of high relevance to researchers and clinicians interested in body image and appearance concerns.


Keywords
body imagemediasocial mediabeauty ideals
Chapter and author infoShow +
1. Introduction
This chapter examines the role of the mass media in the perception of beauty ideals and how those ideals, in turn, affect individuals’ behavior and well‐being. The mass media play a critical role in people’s self‐image by informing and reflecting what people consider to be beautiful or attractive. One of the ways in which they do so is through the common use of very thin and attractive models in print and other media, often termed the ‘thin ideal’, which communicate the way that people believe they should look in order to be attractive and desirable to others. There are different aspects of appearance about which the media can convey beauty ideals, including hair, skin, and facial features. However, we focus this chapter on how the media convey messages about body weight and shape ideals. For women in Western culture, a very common attitude is that thinness is beauty. We review the literature on the role of mass media—both traditional media and newer, online media—and how they interact with psychological factors to impact appearance concerns and body image.


Body image is a multidimensional construct that refers to one’s perception of and attitudes about the size and shape of one’s body. It has both a perceptual component that refers to how we see our body size, shape, weight, physical characteristics, performance, and movement, and an evaluative component, which refers to how we feel about these attributes and how those feelings influence our behaviors [1]. Body dissatisfaction is experienced when one perceives that their body falls short of the societal ideal in terms of size and/or shape, regardless of a person’s objective size or shape. In other words, body dissatisfaction is influenced not only by how we interpret societal ideals, but by how we perceive ourselves. Therefore, body dissatisfaction and perceptions of beauty are inextricably linked. Body dissatisfaction is the number one risk factor for a number of unhealthy behaviors, including eating disorders and chronic dieting. Therefore, a delineation of the origins of body dissatisfaction is important not just for theories of perceptions of beauty, but for clinical and practical implications.


2. Effects of exposure to idealized media images on body image
In modern times, most people living in developed countries encounter mass media (e.g. television, music videos, movies, and magazines) on a daily basis. Thin ideal images often accompany various advertised products, the pairing of which reinforces the idea that if you buy or use a particular product, you, too, can be beautiful. In the past two decades, there has been an abundance of empirical research concerning the impact of exposure to idealized bodies in the media on how people perceive and evaluate their own bodies. Most of this research has been on women, among whom the idea that ‘thin is beautiful’ is prevalent. Correlational studies typically examine the association between naturalistic media consumption and various body image constructs, such as body perception, ideal body size, and body dissatisfaction. Experimental studies typically expose participants to photographs of very thin and attractive models under varying conditions and measure the participant’s subsequent body image. The latter type of studies can advance our understanding of the causal effects of media on body image. Several meta‐analytic reviews of such studies have been conducted with regard to these findings. The first meta‐analysis of the effects of exposure to thin ideal media was conducted by Groesz et al. [2], who examined 25 experimental studies conducted between 1983 and 1998 involving a total of 2292 participants. They concluded that women’s body image was significantly more negative after viewing thin media images, as compared to after viewing control images or images of average‐sized or plus‐sized models, and that this effect was moderate in size.


Although the previous meta‐analysis was limited to experimental studies, Grabe et al. [3] conducted a meta‐analysis of both experimental and correlational studies examining the link between media exposure and body dissatisfaction, as well as internalization of the thin ideal—the extent to which someone believes that a very slender body type is beautiful—in women. They reviewed 90 studies and concluded that media exposure was associated with decreased body satisfaction in women and that this effect was moderate in size. They also concluded that media exposure was associated with increased internalization of the thin ideal across 23 studies and that the effect size was moderate.


There is a robust empirical support for the idea that exposure to idealized body images in traditional forms of media (e.g. magazines and television) affects perceptions of beauty and appearance concerns by leading women to internalize a very slender female body type as ideal or beautiful. There is also support for the idea that exposure to the thin ideal is associated with body dissatisfaction in the moment among women. While most of the research on this topic has been conducted with female participants, there is also some research on male participants. Men’s and women’s body ideals vary considerably across Western culture, where most of this research has been conducted. While women’s idealized body is slim, men’s body ideal is lean, but well‐defined and muscular. Blond [4] conducted a meta‐analysis of experimental research concerning the effects of exposure to media featuring the male muscular ideal on men’s body image. In her review of 15 studies with a total of 1085 participants, she concluded that exposure to images of idealized male bodies caused men to feel more dissatisfied with their own bodies and that the effect size was small. In sum, we can say that the association between exposure to idealized body images in the media and body dissatisfaction holds true for both men and women, with the effect in women being slightly stronger than in men. There is no established cause for this gender difference to date.


Although it has been established that exposure to idealized bodies in the media has significant effects on how both men and women want to look (and, sometimes, how they think they do look), it is important to emphasize that not all individuals respond to viewing idealized images in the same way. Research has revealed various individual differences that moderate the impact of exposure to idealized images on body image. For example, a person’s psychological motives for viewing thin ideal media images can determine whether and how they affect that individual’s self‐perceptions of beauty.


Social comparison refers to an individual’s tendency to compare oneself to other people and has been found to moderate the impact of exposure to idealized media. Tiggemann and McGill [5] found that the effects of thin‐ideal advertisements on mood and body dissatisfaction were mediated by social comparison in a sample of 126 undergraduate women such that women who engaged in more social comparison experienced more negative mood and body dissatisfaction after exposure to magazine advertisements containing images of thin‐idealized female beauty. Indeed, social comparison, as either a psychological trait or state, is a reliable moderator of the impact of idealized media exposure on both men and women. For example, Galioto and Crowther [6] found that trait social comparison as measured by a self‐report questionnaire predicted increased body dissatisfaction among undergraduate males who viewed muscular idealized men in advertisements. Moreover, Tiggemann et al. [7] further investigated the role of cognitive processing in the impact of idealized images on mood and body dissatisfaction. They found that instructing women to engage in social comparison processing (e.g. asking the participant to rate how much she would like her body to look like that of a thin model) of thin‐ideal images led to greater negative mood and body dissatisfaction as compared to control. Interestingly, they also found that giving women fantasy processing instructions (i.e. imagining oneself in the place of a thin model) led to improved mood as compared to control. Similar results have been found by others [8]. In sum, the way that idealized images are cognitively processed is a key determinant in terms of the impact those images have on an individual’s self‐perceptions of attractiveness or beauty. But little is yet known about why some people are more at risk for comparing themselves to idealized images.


Trait, dietary restraint has been found to moderate individuals’ responses to idealized body images found in the media. Mills et al. [8] found that restrained eaters (i.e. chronic dieters) are differentially impacted by exposure to thin ideal media as compared to unrestrained eaters. Restrained eaters frequently attempt to lose weight by restricting what they eat. We concluded that restrained eaters may be susceptible to a ‘thin fantasy’ when viewing ideal body images. Specifically, restrained eaters, but not unrestrained eaters, rated both their ideal and current body as thinner and felt more attractive as a result of viewing ideal body images in magazine advertisements. This effect was further moderated by thinness attainability beliefs. Specifically, the immediate enhancement of women’s feelings of attractiveness following exposure to the thin ideal was stronger when dieters were led to believe that they could lose weight through dieting, as compared to when they were told that losing weight is extremely difficult. In other words, under certain conditions, thin ideal media images can actually make women feel better about their appearance. These effects are presumed to be short‐lived, although no research to date has examined how long self‐enhancement lasts after exposure to thin ideal images.


Further evidence that the context of the idealized images is important in terms of their psychological impact comes from a recent study by Veldhuis et al. [9]. The authors found that when self‐improvement messages accompanied images of idealized bodies, exposure increased body satisfaction in a sample of undergraduate men and women, as compared to self‐evaluation messages or control. Knobloch‐Westerwick [10] also found that women, who made self‐improvement (versus self‐evaluation) social comparisons in response to thin‐ideal images, had improved body satisfaction as opposed to decreased body satisfaction. In other words, the messages that accompany idealized body images commonly found in the media make a difference in terms of how people feel about their bodies after looking at them.


Lastly, the psychological construct of body appreciation, or the extent to which one allows negative body‐related information to be rejected and positive information to be accepted, is an individual difference variable that has been found to be protective against some of the negative psychological impacts that stem from exposure to idealized media images. Andrew et al. [11] found that, in a sample of university women, participants with low body appreciation experienced increased body dissatisfaction after exposure to thin‐ideal advertisements whereas individuals with high body appreciation did not. This lends support to the idea that women, who have a positive bias in their perceptions of their body, are less likely to experience a negative shift in body image in response to exposure to thin ideal media images.


Body dissatisfaction is a major predictor of the development of clinically disordered eating. While it oversimplifies the psychopathology of eating disorders to suggest that exposure to thin ideal images causes eating disorders, thin ideal images do have significant health implications. For both women and men, the development of unhealthy weight control practices can result from body dissatisfaction, such as strict or chronic dieting, excessive exercise, and steroid use. To mitigate the negative effects of thin ideal exposure on the health and well‐being of their viewers, it has been suggested that magazines should contain disclaimer labels if a photo has been retouched. In 2009, Australia’s National Advisory Group on Body Image endorsed the use of warning labels by the advertising, media, and fashion industries to indicate digitally altered images. Other countries have considered a similar public policy. Retouching of magazine photos can include enhancements of skin tone or texture, hair, or make‐up, but most attention has been paid to retouching related to models’ weight and shape. Photos are often altered by magazines so that flesh is trimmed off in areas like the stomach and thighs, giving the appearance of a slimmer body. The idea is that if women were aware that media images are not real, they could distance themselves psychologically from unrealistic beauty standards and therefore not be influenced by them. Unfortunately, results from this line of research suggest that disclaimer labels are generally not very effective in terms of minimizing the negative effects of thin ideal images on viewers’ body image, mood/confidence, or intention to diet [12, 13]. In addition, a popular media literacy campaign aimed at diminishing the negative effects of exposure to the thin ideal (i.e. a 75‐second Dove Evolution video, showing all of the effort that goes into producing a photo of a model who looks flawless) did not improve how women feel about their own appearance [14]. Clearly, cultural beauty standards as communicated by the media are very powerful messages. Even knowing that thin ideal images are not real does not stop women from wanting to achieve those standards of beauty.


3. The media and perceived appearance norms
It could be that the mass media affect their audience not only by reinforcing beauty ideals (‘thin is beautiful’) or by eliciting immediate changes in terms of how people perceive and evaluate their own appearance, but also by influencing perceived norms. Experimental findings demonstrate that perceptions of what is considered to be ‘average’, influence how individuals feel about their own bodies, and can even affect eating behavior [12, 13]. In other words, one of the reasons that media‐portrayed thin ideal images can be harmful is because they skew what people think of as being ‘normal’ or typical in a given population. There is no research to date directly testing the question of whether media images change people’s perceptions of what is considered average or typical. However, there is indirect evidence to support this idea. Studies show that women generally want their bodies to appear a certain way depending on (1) what they think other people find attractive and (2) what they think the average person looks like.


In a series of experimental studies, Bair et al. [12] examined the influence of normative body ideals (i.e. the body type purported to be preferred by their peers) on body image. University students were told that their peers preferred the look of either relatively thinner or relatively heavier body types. In other words, we varied what participants believed to be ‘beautiful’ to other people. The gender of the peers whose preferences were being reported was also manipulated. Participants then reported the body size they most wanted to look like, from a range of hand‐drawn silhouettes. Women selected a thinner personal ideal body size in the thin norm condition than in the heavy norm condition. This was true whether they were told what either men or other women found most attractive.


In a related study by Mills et al. [13], we examined the effect of purported body norms on ideal and current body size perception. In study one, female participants were given bogus information on the average body size by women of the same age as participants. Current and ideal body size perceptions were then measured. Women reported a thinner ideal body size in the thinner norm condition than in the heavier norm condition, further supporting the idea that ideal body size is malleable. Women had shifted their ideal body size so that it was just a bit thinner than what they believed the average woman’s body looked like. We interpreted these findings to mean that women tend to pick their ideal as being thinner than average so that they can be seen (or see themselves) as special. Study two replicated these results, but in a sample of young men. In this case, body norms were manipulated through purported averages in terms of muscularity rather than thinness. Men had a more muscular ideal body size in the more muscular norm condition than in the less muscular norm condition.


4. The bi‐directionality of media exposure and body dissatisfaction
Despite the fact that they can contribute to body dissatisfaction, mass media featuring thin ideal images are popular forms of media. Many women and men often choose to expose themselves to idealized body images as featured in the media. This apparent paradox has received little attention to date in the literature. Recently, we examined whether individuals dissatisfied with their bodies are actually more likely to seek out media featuring frequent images of idealized bodies [14]. We hypothesized that the correlation between thin‐ideal media exposure and body dissatisfaction is bi‐directional, and that people who feel bad about their appearance may actually consume higher levels of such media. It was predicted that young women who were induced to feel dissatisfied with their bodies would gravitate toward choosing media featuring thin‐idealized content. In two experimental studies, a negative body image rumination task was used to induce body dissatisfaction. Participants were then asked to select their choice of different media (appearance‐related versus non‐appearance‐related) for an ostensible market research task. We found that young women who had just ruminated about being unhappy with their bodies disproportionately, selected magazine or online video media that featured thin, idealized body imagery over non‐appearance‐related media. In other words, young women who had been instructed to think about not liking their bodies then gravitated toward thinness‐related media that focused on dieting, fitness, health, and beauty. These findings warrant further replication, but suggest that people who are unhappy with their appearance turn to the media that feature thin, beautiful models, possibly for advice or information, or to see advertised products aimed at bringing aspects of one’s appearance closer to the perceived ideal [14].


5. The new media: social and online media and their influence on body image
More and more people encounter online media on a daily basis. The Internet is commonly used for social networking (i.e. online activities that create and maintain interpersonal relationships with family, friends, and acquaintances). Social media are particularly popular among female young adults, a group in which body dissatisfaction is common [15]. Facebook, the most popular social media platform in the world, boasts over one billion daily users, with three‐quarters of online American adults logging on [16]. Instagram, a popular photo‐sharing application, has 600 million users, half of whom use it daily, with 35% using it several times a day [16]. The majority of online 18–29 year olds use Facebook and more than half of these individuals use Instagram [16]. These social media platforms and others—such as YouTube, Snapchat, and Pinterest—have a visual element and involve users posting photos of themselves for others to see and on which to comment. Contemporary media platforms are changing how people internalize beauty ideals, how they try to control how other people see them and how they get feedback from others about how they look.


Most households worldwide have home Internet access, and, in some countries, children, adolescents, and young adults identify social media sites as their primary online communication activity [17]. Given that both social media use and body dissatisfaction are pervasive among adolescent and young adult women, it is not surprising that media and body image research is expanding into this new media domain. The tripartite model of influence proposes that peers, parents, and media are the main sources of the development of body image and eating disturbances. Furthermore, research shows that appearance comparison at least partially mediates the relationships between these sociocultural factors and eating and weight‐related behaviors [18]. Each of these three sociocultural factors converges on social media.


Until the past 5 years, research on Internet exposure, perceptions of beauty, and body image concerns was virtually non‐existent. In line with research on traditional forms of mass media and body image, recent correlational studies reveal that social media use is linked to body image concerns and self‐objectification both among men and women [19–28]. Also, much like the relationship between the traditional media and body image ideals, the link between social media use and body image is not straightforward; it appears to be affected by various psychological factors, such as individual differences in the tendency to compare one’s appearance to others’. When people compare themselves to others they consider to be superior to themselves and it is known as upward social comparison. Downward social comparison is when people compare themselves to others, they consider to be inferior on some dimension. Exactly which individual and situational factors determine social comparison processes on social media remain to be empirically tested. But because social comparison moderates the effects of traditional media on viewers, as reviewed above, it is likely that these psychological processes also play a role in the effects of social media on users.


Unlike traditional forms of media like television, movies, and magazines, social media sites are designed to actively engage the user. Since there are many ways for users to engage with online media, such as scrolling through newsfeeds and profiles, commenting on other users’ posts, seeing who else has liked/commented/endorsed posts, or creating and uploading their own content, it is difficult to tease apart exactly how online media are related to perceptions of beauty. Researchers have started to use various research methods to study the link between online media exposure and appearance concerns (e.g. qualitative data, correlational studies, and experimental simulated social media use) that may or may not be analogous to how people use social media in the real world. For instance, researchers have begun to bring social media into the laboratory for study. When women passively view mock social media profiles versus models in magazines, there appears to be no difference between the media types in terms of subsequent increases in appearance comparison and body image dissatisfaction [19]. Although some researchers find that adolescent girls’ time spent on the Internet is positively correlated with internalization of the thin ideal, body surveillance, and drive for thinness, experimental studies suggest that mere exposure to one’s own social media account does not negatively or immediately impact young women’s appearance concerns [21, 26, 27].


One of the unique aspects of social media, versus traditional media, is that they are made up of communication with peers and/or public figures. It is the elements of interactivity and connectedness that make social media distinct from other media forms and rife with opportunities for users to perceive, compare, and internalize standards of beauty. Traditional media literacy efforts may have helped people think critically about how photos of models and celebrities are frequently edited by advertisers and editors, and how they display completely unrealistic standards of beauty. However, social media platforms expose users to photos of real‐world peers, which may dissuade people from critically analyzing the images they see on social media. In truth, users can present their ideal selves through editing, enhancing, and embellishing their online images and appearance [28]. More research is needed to determine whether social media users engage in selective presentation of their own appearance, but overlook the notion that other users have done the same.


People can engage in a variety of behaviors related to perceptions of beauty in online forms of media. Examples include taking multiple selfies and choosing to post only the flattering photos, using camera filters to enhance the appearance of a person’s face, and photo‐shopping body parts to make them appear thinner. Research is just starting to examine the relations between these types of self‐presentation strategies on social media and well‐being (body image and appearance self‐esteem) among women. A study of online dating website users found that individuals commonly managed their online profile by posting selfies of which they felt especially proud [29]. It is not yet known whether self‐presentation strategies like photo enhancement actually improve body image and appearance self‐esteem (by allowing users to present an idealized version of themselves to others) or whether they worsen appearance concerns because they perpetuate an evaluation of and focus on physical appearance.


It seems that people who post photos of themselves on social media probably do so when they feel good about their appearance. Indeed, research suggests that the use of social media predicts subsequent body dissatisfaction and not the other way round [30]. It could be, however, that social media users post photos of themselves when they feel especially good about their appearance, but that they end up feeling worse about their appearance in the longer term after frequent use of social media. The longer term adverse effects of social media use could be due to looking at images of idealized, and often retouched, photos of other people, as well as reading online commentary about people’s appearance. Replication and clarification of the causal effects of social media usage on body image and appearance self‐esteem is an important goal for future research in this field.


Popular social media platforms have begun to acknowledge the risks inherent in exposure to certain types of photos. At this time, Instagram has banned hashtags such as ‘thinspiration’ and ‘proanorexia’ because Instagram views them as actively promoting self‐harm. These are terms that would be familiar to many social media users (particularly young women) and alert viewers to photos that are meant to glorify very thin bodies. Before content associated with eating disorders is shown, a graphic‐images warning and link to the National Eating Disorders website is displayed. Other appearance‐related hashtags, such as ‘sopretty’, ‘attractive’, ‘bikinibody’, and ‘everybodyisbeautiful’ are, at present, no longer searchable on the photo‐sharing application [31]. Although it is not clear what the impetus was for Instagram to enact these guidelines, advocacy groups generally applaud these types of content moderation efforts aimed at the prevention of disordered eating and body image disturbances.


In summary, research that addresses the question of whether posting, modifying, and viewing photos on social media hurts or helps women’s body image and appearance self‐esteem is currently underway. The available evidence and theory point to exposure to thin, idealized photos online, and taking and retouching selfies—which may masquerade as promoting body positivity and esteem—as particularly risky behaviors in terms of body image and self‐esteem.


6. Conclusions
One of the ways in which the media affect perceptions of beauty is through the common use of very thin and attractive models, known as the thin ideal, which reinforces the idea that ‘thin is beautiful’. We summarized the research literature on the mass media, both traditional media and online social media, and how they appear to interact with psychological factors to impact appearance concerns and body image disturbances. While correlational studies show a clear link between exposure to thin ideal media images and body dissatisfaction, the results of experimental studies are more mixed. The most reliable finding in the literature is that exposure to thin media images makes women want to be thinner. In other words, there is strong support for the idea that traditional forms of media (e.g. magazines, music videos) affect perceptions of beauty and appearance concerns by leading women to internalize a very slender body type as ideal or beautiful. We further suggest that the media affect their audiences by influencing perceived beauty norms, thereby skewing perceptions of reality (and not just fantasy or inspiration). Experimental findings demonstrate that perceptions of what is considered to be ‘average’ influence how individuals feel about their own bodies and appearance. Rather than simply being passive recipients of unrealistic beauty ideals communicated to them via the media, a great number of individuals actually seek out idealized images in the media. Across two experimental studies, we found that women who were induced to feel unhappy with their bodies were actually more likely to choose to expose themselves to different forms of media featuring thin, beautiful models. This idea has received virtually no research attention to date but is important, as it highlights the complexity of people’s relationships to beauty ideals. Finally, there is a need for an even better understanding of the role of new, more modern forms of mass media in impacting society’s perception of beauty and notions of idealized physical forms. These more modern forms of media are changing the way in which people internalize standards of beauty and the ways in which they try to control others’ perceptions of their appearance. Online media involvement is more interactive than traditional media, and the effects of self‐presentation strategies on perceptions of beauty have just begun to be studied. Social media represent an emerging area of research that is of high relevance to researchers and clinicians interested in body image and appearance concerns.




I feel like this is going to be a controversial topic.


Warning: This article contains talk of scales, numbers, and may be triggering for those currently struggling with body dysmorphia and other related body image disorders.


We need to talk about scales. For a really long time, I was so scared of this thing because it actually had the power to ruin my entire day. All I had to do was step on it, and if the number was higher than I wanted, I’d be curled up in fetal position crying. I wouldn’t want to do anything for the rest of the day because in my head, it was pointless. It got to a point where the scale was controlling my happiness. So I did what every body-loving article and influencer on the internet told me to do – THROW IT OUT.


So, was it the right thing to do?




I am not here to argue if scales or good or bad. They are neither good nor bad. It just depends on how you choose to look at it. And the truth is, the way I view the scale and my relationship with the scale has evolved over the years. It’s been both negative AND positive. And that’s something people never talk about because I feel like it’s either you either hate the scale…or you’re a guy.


So let’s go back to the beginning to understand how my relationship with the scale went from being non-existent to obsessive to terrified to empowering. My goal with this video is to teach you how to stop fearing the scale because you simply cannot let this piece of metal and glass control you. I am going to show you how I freed myself from the scale’s power, and put that power back in MY hands.


I believe that there are 4 stages of relationships that one can have with a scale.
#1. The nonexistent relationship where you literally don’t care what you weigh because your weight does not impact your life whatsoever.


#2. The abusive relationship where the number on the scale affects your happiness, controls your mood, and has power over your self-worth. For a lot of girls, a light number means you’re going to have a good day and a heavier number means you’re going to have a bad day.


#3. The break up where you realize how messed up the scale makes you feel so you throw it out and ban yourself from ever stepping it again! This is a healing phase to re-learn that your self worth is not related to your weight.


Most people in the body positive community will tell you that that is pure freedom. That THAT is winning. But there’s actually one more stage. The final stage is hard to reach, but it’s possible and it’s even more freeing and more empowering than stage #3. I’ll get to stage #4 in a little bit. 


For now, I want to define each stage a little more…purely from my perspective as a female who has struggled with her weight and her body image.






1. The non-existent relationship
In my experience, this only really existed from zero to eight years old.


One of the first times I realized that weight was even a thing was when I was 8. I was at a family party at one of my auntie’s houses so excited to be eating amazing Vietnamese foods that only came out for special occasions like people’s birthdays or weddings. I had just taken my first sweet and savory bite of bánh ướt when one of the other kids walked up to my table and started staring at me. She pointed her finger at me and asked “Why are you so fat?” 


When those words came out of her mouth, my body froze. The food in my mouth suddenly lost all its flavor. I remember my face getting hot and my eyes welling up. I didn’t know how to respond so I just ran to the bathroom. I locked the door, spit out my half-chewed food, and started crying and crying and crying. It was from that day forward that my weight suddenly had meaning. And it wasn’t a good one.




2. The abusive relationship
This stage lasted for me from about 9 years old to my late twenties. Basically, 20 years.


In the abusive relationship stage, I did a lot of bad things. Things that are super uncharacteristic of who I am today and I am super ashamed to share what I am about to share.


I played around with really unhealthy things to try to lose weight. As a teenager, I used to use diet teas, diet pills, fat blockers, fat burners, and laxatives. I was so OBSESSED with getting skinnier and I literally didn’t care how I was going to do it. Plus I didn’t know anything about anything. Honestly, if I were me then, right now, I’d probably fall into the traps of skinny teas and waist trainers. I was naive, desperate, and I just wanted to lose weight so bad so I could fit in. Maybe have more friends. Maybe have boys like me.


I remember specifically this one time in the Fall of Freshman year of college, when I went to Rite Aid to look for diet pills. After spending about 30 minutes going up and down the supplements aisle, I ended up choosing this pack of green tea fat burning pills because it was only $8.99. I secretly carried that brown paper bag back to my dorm thinking I had the solution. I was so excited to take one. I remember it smelling so strongly herbal that I wanted to throw up, but I didn’t care, I was going to suck it up and TAKE IT because THIS was going to make me skinny.


After swallowing 1 pill, like the back of the box said, I proceeded to read my bio textbook on mitochondria or whatever you learn in Bio 101. Then, 5 minutes in, I started to feel my heart thump. Then it thumped faster and faster!!! My face started to get hot and my head started to feel really weird. It felt like I was running without having gone on a run. I was so scared I was going to have a heart attack because my heart kept beating faster and faster and faster! I went to go lie down thinking that in that moment, I actually might die.


Then after college, I did my first and only bikini competition where I was trained by a bodybuilding coach to weigh in every day. If I was heavier, he’d tell me to stop eating so many carbs (this included iceberg lettuce), and then he’d proceed to make me do more cardio. I didn’t question his techniques or advice because he had won a ton of trophies in the bodybuilding world, so I just went into student mode and just listened to my teacher.


Losing weight throughout my 8-week bikini competition journey made me feel like I was achieving something I had never been able to do. It felt so good and so addicting to feel “successful”. Was I happy though? No. If you ask Sam who I became around that time, it was a really mean, really cranky, vanity driven version of Cassey.


After the competition when I decided to go back to “normal-healthy” living, not bikini competitor living (which is not healthy or sustainable for the long term by the way) – my body was so deprived that it soaked up every calorie I was eating. I started to gain weight and I couldn’t control it. My body was so messed up. Every time I stepped on the scale, it made no sense. Sometimes salads would make me gain and pizza would make me lose. Working out didn’t even seem to matter. I had totally damaged my metabolism. I was so scared to step on the scale because anytime I’d see the number jump, I’d cry and let the rest of my day go to waste.




3. The break up
There comes a time when any girl with body image issues should probably just get rid of their scale. When I made the decision to live a scale-free life at the end of my 20s until I was 32, it was freeing. Initially.


It was the phase of my life where I was gaining weight on YouTube and everyone saw. People commented on my body all the time, saying that my workouts must not work because I was getting fat. There was hate from a community of YouTubers who made videos about my body, shaming me for the way I looked and the way I ate. It was during this time period that I had to toughen up and learn how to love my body regardless of how I looked or how much I weighed. I think a lot of you guys probably found my workouts around this time because of my viral video “The Perfect Body” where I visually photoshop myself on camera to look like how people want me to look. Bigger boobs, bigger butt, thinner waist, thigh gappier thighs.






It was from that moment that Blogilates became synonymous with body positivity and it was a good thing for me. I was still healing from years of hating my body, and hearing that other women were feeling the same things I was feeling was so encouraging and so empowering.


Body positivity helped free me from food jail. I was no longer scared of eating foods I used to label as bad. So Sam and I kind of went crazy. We ordered dessert after every meal, we ate late, we went out a lot, and we really had a great time trying out so many new restaurants. It was awesome to have this break from eating healthy because it actually ended up recalibrating my metabolism in a way.


However, when your job is to make fitness videos and you actually need the RIGHT fuel to get through a workout, you just can’t eat like that. I remember being on set for a HIIT video and asking to take a break between filming because I could barely breathe. It was so embarrassing because ALL of my videos are filmed in real-time, no breaks – ever. After that shoot, I realized that real food freedom doesn’t mean eat whatever you want all the time. Food is supposed to help you not hurt you, and my “food freedom” was getting to a point where I couldn’t even do my job right.


So as you can see, there is a stage after stage 3. It doesn’t apply to everyone, because some people’s stage 3 is the type of freedom they need.


But not for me.


Eating “whatever I wanted” did not result in true happiness and freedom because it was hindering my strength and my endurance. It was affecting my body and my business and I was not feeling my best.


That’s why stage 3 for me, was just a temporary healing phase.


4. Empowered relationship with the scale
The empowered relationship is where you are unafraid to step on the scale because you realize it actually doesn’t hold any power over you. A higher number or a lower number on the scale does not affect your mood because you know that your weight is simply a data point and that a scale is simply a tool that could help you reach your goals.


August 2019 was the beginning of stage 4 for me.


You already know that this is when I embarked on my 90-day journey and actually weighed myself every single day. The first day I stepped on the scale, I had to keep repeating to myself that this was just a number. It was still shocking to see how that number after YEARS of not stepping on the scale, but it also felt like I was getting to know myself again. Like I was unafraid to know this extra information about me.


The more I stepped on the scale, the less it scared me. Because I had goals to reach and I needed as many tools to help me as I could! I wanted to get in the best shape of my life mentally and physically and that involved weighing myself, which is fine when you ARE intentionally trying to lose weight, which for the record is NOT a bad thing if you’re going into it with a healthy purpose.


On the contrary, if you’re not in the right headspace when you’re going on a weight loss journey, this is incredibly dangerous for your mental health and I do not want you to go near a scale. Stay in stage 3!


If you still feel like higher numbers make you sad and lower numbers make you happy, I highly suggest that you work on healing yourself first before you do anything related to weight loss. You will be at risk of falling back into stage 2 – the abusive relationship.


If you still want to go on a journey – go on one! But make it about lifting heavier, holding longer planks, running faster, or finishing one of my 7-day or 30-day challenges! You have plenty to choose from on my blog. What you need are some non-numerical achievements to give you a sense of what un-weight related success feels like.


Remember, I didn’t get to stage 4 without being in stage 3 for like five to six years. I took 5-6 years to heal my body image issues and re-calibrate my metabolism. I’ve now been in 4 of my relationship with the scale, the empowered stage, and I feel good. Who knows what stages are still left to be uncovered but if i discover any more, I will share them with you.


I’d love to know which stage you’re currently in with the scale! Please leave a comment below and let’s have a really open discussion about it where you are and where you wanna be. I’ll see you in there.